Revivals of late 1940s phenomena can be seen in gay life. Driven underground by The mass mobilization and single-sex environments that prevailed during war fostered  new gay relations, only to see declines under the force of the Cold War and Red Scare by the early 1950s. Coexistent with the repression was the development of new forms of gay sociability and new styles. “Camp” steadily grew as means of playing with disguise, costume, self-presentation, and coded expressions of pain, pleasure and pathos.  Certain entertainments attracted special devotion in this vein due to the kinds of emotional, performative display they permitted, particularly opera (and charismatic divas), torch-singing, and the like.[@wood1995, p. 33]

By the late 1950s, Judy Garland, who had moved on from child stardom in *The Wizard of Oz* to build great popularity as a stage singer, first in vaudeville-like routines and later as an admired vocalist, had a growing audience of gay fans.  That appeal had diverse sources:  the enduring image from *Oz* of a child’s journey through a fantastic land full of mystery and danger, the lavish production of her stage appearances, the full-throated emotionality of her singing, knowledge of her suffering under the manipulation of movie agents, unhappy marriages, and drug and alcohol addictions.[@berger1960, p. 66]  Under all that pressure, Garland cracked and required a long hospital convalescence in the late 1950s.  She emerged as the new decade began, giving a comeback concert at Carnegie Hall on April 23, 1961, to rapturous acclaim by her devoted fans, the recording industry (the live show became a top-seller as a double-LP album), and music critics.  The event drew hundreds of her fan base among gay men, who rallied to cheer Garland on and share the passionate feeling of connection she created with her audience.  The scene represented an early move from the veiled sexual communities gays had built through the 1950s to a greater visibility in public life.  Garland’s comeback was a kind of collective coming out. [But never on Sunday. @goldstein2015, p. 334.]
