Drawing on case studies of Colombia and the United States, Offner demonstrates that even at the zenith of social democracy, the dominant mode of socioeconomic change was not centralized decision-making but decentralized public-private partnerships designed to incorporate businesspeople into projects of extraction, cultivation, manufacturing, and construction. Economists tried to control the process--and use private capitalists for their own ends--but more often than not, they were the ones who ended up being used. "[E]conomists who considered themselves public-minded planners could never disentangle themselves from businessmen pursuing private interest," she writes.
The shape of the state changed as a consequence. In her central example of the Cauca Valley in western Colombia, Offner finds that the state recreated "itself in the image of private enterprise, decentralizing public functions and vesting public powers in the leaders of a private business association." When this model came home to the United States, it landed first in marginalized spaces--the "little Colombias" of inner cities and indigenous reservations--before being generalized. The private-prison complex, the commercial control of educational testing, and the for-profit provision of job training are bastard children not of neoliberalism but of the New Deal.
Because Offner’s primum mobile is not the academic economist but the capitalist, her tack is to shift attention to the business sector itself. What she finds time and again is that business interests are ambidextrous, happy to work as social democrats one moment if it serves their purposes, and neoliberals the next. True believers are in far less supply than pragmatists.

When Giddens theorized the Third Way in the late 1990s, he suggested we must stop worrying so much about equality and inequality and begin focusing on exclusion and inclusion. Crystallized here was a move that many define as economism: away from the political language of rights and toward the economic language of opportunities. Not everybody might end up successful, but everybody needed a chance. Offner’s study shows just how long these ideas had been around. The state long relied on private providers to expand the penumbra of its provisioning but only by offering ever more latitude and profit to private interests in a manner that undercut the universality of provision. In her words, "the state enlarged its capacity by underwriting the growth of private enterprise."

What Offner calls the "parasitism of business mobilization during the heyday of developmentalism" meant flexibility. It’s not an entirely novel insight. Appelbaum cites one financial lender telling the Wall Street Journal that "We foreign bankers are for the free market when we’re out to make a buck and believe in the state when we are about to lose a buck." But Offner shows how the voice of business entered the academy directly. Rather than portraying the rise of the economists as a smooth ascent, she portrays a struggle within the ivory tower’s commanding heights between the fields of economics and business administration.

Unlike economists, who look down on interdisciplinarity, the fields of management and business administration have always been syncretic, drawing on insights from across fields while centrally privileging the singular capacity and experience of the entrepreneur. Offner describes a position that is not seriously entertained by the other three books, but accords well with our world from Davos to Silicon Valley: the proposition that neither politicians nor economists but "corporate managers . . . were the true guardians of the public good and the proper stewards of the state."

Offner brings home her arguments in a final chapter devoted to Eduardo Wiesner, a Colombian economist famous for his activity at the IMF and World Bank at the high point of structural adjustment in the 1980s and 1990s. Wiesner ended his career acting like a perfect character from Susan George’s 1997 article--or Appelbaum’s book--invoking Friedman and Buchanan to justify offloading state responsibilities to private actors and tying the hands of policymakers from expanding budgets. He would seem to be a great piece of evidence for the validity of the argument that one can track the spread of neoliberalism by following the footprints of the minions of Mont Pelerin around the world. Yet Offner insists that such a reading would take the bait laid by the libertarian propagandists themselves.

In fact, Wiesner had been active in development circles in Colombia since the 1960s, a time when he sang a different melody but danced to the same rhythm. The question he had been asking then was one that everybody--including all the expatriate New Dealers--was asking: how to extend state capacity in ways that broaden access to markets without giving rise to pesky questions about equality.

Wiesner’s solution then was everyone else’s: incentivize private capital to participate in state-managed projects. Over the decades, private capital flexed its muscles ever more and changing global circumstances made it ever harder for the state to capture revenue. By the 1990s, Wiesner could advocate the deployment of private interests to substitute for the state without moving definitively from one paradigm to another, from social democrat to neoliberal.

In Offner’s words, the mixed economy--always a hybrid of public and private forms--was simply reshuffled, leaving the public ever more subordinate to the demands of the private. As she sums it up powerfully, "Wiesner never saw himself as a state killer but as a defender of a state in danger of collapse."

Economic reasoning has infiltrated political party programs and public rhetoric. It underpins the supposed objectivity of decisions that shape our lives, from state budget assessments to environmental policy to central bank direction. It deserves our attention and our careful study. Yet Offner’s book reminds us to keep one eye on the economists and the other on the shifting alliances of capitalists that profit from the policy worlds that social scientific knowledge helps create.

The need for a stereoscopic view is clear when trying to understand the way Trump’s administration has ruled economically. Despite apocalyptic pronouncements about the demise of the liberal international rules-based order, the sectors of the U.S. economy served by the current administration have changed at the margins rather than at the center.

Trump’s trade, tax, regulation, and manufacturing policy is not driven primarily by a theory of economics but by the influence of private interests in fulfilling their agenda through him. The title of another recent book argues that "economics rules," but the evidence would suggest it is still capital that rules. To stage an effective opposition, it pays to recall Offner’s point that the most effective campaign against private power in the twentieth century was not mounted by international diplomats nor any kind of economists but by social movements determined in their own ways to refuse to be ruled at all.

**Quinn Slobodian**’s most recent book is *Globalists: The End of Empire and the Birth of Neoliberalism* (Harvard 2018). He teaches history at Wellesley College.
