Empires of Light: Edison, Tesla, Westinghouse, and the Race to Electrify the World
Jill Jonnes

But there was a far darker side to Morgan. As a conservative financier, he was deeply uncomfortable with the roller-coaster chaos and competition of aborning industrial capitalism.
LOCATION: 265

As Morgan’s power grew, so did his passion for control, and it would govern much of his ruthless strategy in the coming bitter struggle over electricity.
LOCATION: 270

The very word electric was coined by Gilbert, who played on the Greek word for amber, elektron, to come up with a term to describe amber’s attracting qualities for certain materials.
LOCATION: 365

Leyden, Holland. Professor Pieter
NOTE: storing electricity 1746
LOCATION: 434

flown his kite, he discovered that French electricians had beaten him to it! They had performed his proposed experiments from his book first.
LOCATION: 530

United States
NOTE: no United States in 1752
LOCATION: 533

So the animal versus metallic electricity dispute dragged
LOCATION: 575

which will, no doubt, astonish you, is only the assemblage of a number of good conductors.”
LOCATION: 588

It operates, in a word, by an indestructible charge, by a perpetual action or impulse in the electric fluid.”
NOTE: The Volta battery
LOCATION: 598

Ironically, the steady current of electricity generated by Volta’s battery—steady direct current—came to be known as Galvanic, thus verbally immortalizing his electrical foe. Volta, in turn, was linguistically enshrined by the term volt, which measures the electrical force of a current.
LOCATION: 607

Ampère also showed that currents flowing parallel in the same direction attract each other and currents flowing in opposite directions repel.
LOCATION: 672

Simply stated, Faraday’s law of electromagnetic induction says that an “electric current is set up in a closed circuit by a changing magnetic field.”23
LOCATION: 729

Unlike direct current (DC), where the electrons are spaced evenly as they flow steadily along the conductor, alternating current (AC) causes the electrons to cluster and advance and retreat in fits and starts.
LOCATION: 825

“The keynote of [Edison’s] work is commercial utility. He asks himself when a new idea is suggested, ‘Will this be valuable from the industrial point of view? Will it do something important better than existing methods?’”
LOCATION: 919

John Kruesi, a master Swiss machinist who sported a huge drooping mustache over a thick black beard. Kruesi’s task, at which he excelled, was to translate Edison’s rough sketches into high-quality working models.
LOCATION: 934

NOTE: Ah,
LOCATION: 1003

But just as he had concluded that in order to slash copper costs he would need low currents pulsating invisibly over his wires and a high-resistance filament, now he realized he must have more powerful generators to supply the necessary horsepower for the many thousands of light bulbs he envisioned radiating their cool, quiet glow in Manhattan’s gloomy offices and brownstones.
LOCATION: 1037

these lamps, Batchelor was always assisted by young Francis Jehl, who was in charge of making sure the batteries were fresh
LOCATION: 1073

whose great
LOCATION: 1093

NOTE: Shouldn't this be "jerry" rigged?
LOCATION: 1146

poles. The wires crisscrossed the streets and were festooned from windows and rooftops as if huge crazed spiders had run amok. A range of fast-expanding industries now depended upon electricity (most of it still battery produced)—including the telegraph, telephone, stock tickers, fire and burglar alarms, and certain small manufacturers.
LOCATION: 1350

NOTE: interesting point about poles
LOCATION: 1356

NOTE: Edison more perceptive here than i reckoned
LOCATION: 1366

Yet even as the world hurtled and smashed upon him, Tesla felt that all this hypersensitivity was slowly unleashing from his unconscious the motor design that he had been seeking for almost five years.
LOCATION: 1558

AC induction motor that ran off an AC generator—just as arc lights did—when geniuses like Edison were conquering the world with central stations generating DC? And Edison had motors aplenty to offer customers who wanted them to power their factories. Tesla was about to discover the perils and frustrations of being ahead of his time.
LOCATION: 1604

NOTE: True, but relevance not entirely clear. Mini depression, strike wave?
LOCATION: 1828

many of whom had previously been Blaine supporters.
NOTE: ? Really? Blaine supporters? what about rain upstate?
LOCATION: 1850

So in that autumn, poor Nikola Tesla, the romantic and dreamer, was reeling from “the hardest blow I ever received. Through some local influences, I was forced out of the company, losing not only all my interest but also my reputation as engineer and inventor.”
LOCATION: 1893

NOTE: NB. patent stealing rampant. Modifications could mean capital would not have to pay royalties. Something Westinghouse and Tesla experienced.
LOCATION: 1986

NOTE: Aha
LOCATION: 1990

Right now, a DC central station had to be located in the middle of its service area. What if you could dispense with coal and steam and run electrical generators with hydropower at faraway waterfalls, then use high-voltage AC to send that electricity a great distance? This transformer ought to be able then to step down the high-voltage AC safely before it entered the factory or office building or house.
LOCATION: 2076

“First, they involved transmission over distance.” With air brakes, compressed air was transmitted; with railroad signals, electricity; and with natural gas, the gas itself through pipes. But Usselman’s second observation is, “Many of the technologies that George Westinghouse pursued involved a crucial linking mechanism that served to connect the long-distance transmission lines with the rest of the system. Often these devices incorporated feedback mechanisms that regulated the system.”21
LOCATION: 2185

inventor-engineer Franklin Pope, to see firsthand William Stanley and Reginald Belfield’s great electrical achievement. Here,
LOCATION: 2296

for the historic first time in America, high-voltage electricity had been generated, transmitted, and then stepped down via newly designed transformers to a safe level for domestic consumption. No longer would electric central power stations, with all their coal and noise and smoke, have to be situated in walking distance of urban customers. Generating stations could be located far out of cities, nearer to their fuel sources, and their electricity dispatched quietly in great wire grids, humming across fields and rivers to deliver clean, quiet power.
LOCATION: 2297

AC “we will do no small town business, or even much headway in cities of minor size.”8
NOTE: Wouldn't it be big cities? Or is it numerous DC plants?
LOCATION: 2419

Whatever the reason for this hostile act, Edison’s endorsement did the trick, and in mid-1888 the New York State Legislature would establish electrocution—much to the outrage of (the rest of) the electrical fraternity—as the new means of capital punishment starting January 1, 1889. Edison had just quietly (and secretly) planted something of a legislative land mine intended to damage his AC rivals.
LOCATION: 2512

after working-class readers of the New York World had sent in their pennies and dimes, showing the nation that ordinary people—not millionaires—would be the ones to finally erect the majestic sculpture on her Bedloe’s Island pedestal.
LOCATION: 2573

No alternating current with a higher electromotive force than 300 volts shall be used”—would indeed put the AC men out of business.
LOCATION: 2781

No longer so given to playing the hick, Edison appreciated the importance of impressing his multitudes of visitors.
LOCATION: 2853

Pennsylvania’s all-powerful Republican boss, Matthew Quay,
NOTE: Thought it was Hayes, but there you go
LOCATION: 2930

The fact that Edison’s central plant electricity was expensive and unsuitable for anyplace but high-density cities was rarely a part of the discussion.
NOTE: a ha!
LOCATION: 3022

“had, first of all, forgotten the junkman. His scheme was predicated on control of the world’s supply of copper. But with copper at 17 cents, in very short time scrap dealers had thrown at least 70,000 long tons on the market [about a quarter of the world’s annual consumption]….
LOCATION: 3026

This revered scientist and inventor, the man who had brought the electric light to the world, was unequivocal in his answers to Bourke Cockran’s questions.
LOCATION: 3278

To assuage them and provide some sort of event preparatory to Kemmler’s death, Warden Charles Durston authorized the killing of a calf with the electric chair apparatus.
LOCATION: 3509

Believing Westinghouse cornered, one of the bankers saw an easy chance to gain partial control of this highly valuable industrial property. He said to his colleagues, “Mr. Westinghouse wastes so much on experimentation, and pays so liberally for whatever he wishes in the way of service and patent rights, that we are taking a pretty large risk if we give him a free hand with the fund he has asked us to raise. We ought at least to know what he is doing with our money.”
LOCATION: 3745

The light bulb win did not prove to be the great windfall Edison General Electric had hoped. The final appeal dragged on, and the big Wall Street investors once again became restive as they watched their Edison stock drop from $120 a share to $90. By mid-December of 1891, as famine, typhus, and smallpox ravaged parts of far-off Russia, The New York Times was reporting that Henry Villard’s days as president of Edison General Electric were numbered.
LOCATION: 4065

the reality was that the smaller, lesser-known company was taking over the great name of the electric field. Edison shareholders now controlled only $15 million in the new company, compared with the $18 million controlled by the Thomson-Houston shareholders. The remaining $17 million went into the treasury as future capital.
LOCATION: 4108

that Pullman porters admiringly tagged the “Boss Town of America.”
LOCATION: 4166

by
LOCATION: 4232

Starting the previous October, another shift of men had begun working the cold wintry nights, something possible because the Edison electric plant now powered bright arc lights. The Edison electricity also ran fifty motors that were speeding work along by operating dredges, crushers, tool sharpeners, sawmills, pumps, the hoists for the heavy beams and trusses, and eventually the electric spray painters that made the “staff” so like pearly white marble.
LOCATION: 4270

By the end of that terrible year, 500 banks across Gilded Age America
LOCATION: 4661

And many, including historian Harold Passer, have wondered why the powerful Morgan forces behind GE had not exerted their considerable influence at Cataract to win GE the coveted dynamo contract.
LOCATION: 5235

Eventually, a wiser Westinghouse reached an 1896 patent-sharing agreement with GE that
LOCATION: 5256

allowed the firm use of the all-important Tesla patents, ending such GE takeover attempts.
LOCATION: 5257

Through the Johnsons and then White, Tesla became something of a society darling, a sought-after guest swirling through Manhattan’s most glittering homes, private salons, and lavish restaurants.
LOCATION: 5297

Already it was the world’s sixth largest commercial center, storing mountains of Great Plains cereals in its fifty-two grain elevators before they were shipped out to feed the world. Five million head of livestock passed through each year. Buffalo boasted the world’s largest coal trestle; twenty-six railroads had seven hundred miles of track and depots; every day 250 passenger trains alone came and went. Almost six thousand
LOCATION: 5600

But that AC power still had to be converted to DC to run the train engines, a challenge Westinghouse sought aggressively to solve.
LOCATION: 5733

dividend. In his usual fashion, Westinghouse had been audaciously wading into the financial markets to underwrite his tremendous expansions and innovative enterprises, first increasing the amount of stock, then floating collateral trust bonds and debenture bonds. During the spring and summer of 1907, once again financial weakness and jitters overseas began to infect the New York Stock
LOCATION: 5753

million. With
LOCATION: 5767

Edison was almost unwittingly developing a whole other sector of the American economy, one that was far less capital-intensive and far more glamorous—the entertainment industry.
LOCATION: 5978

Edison never had to worry that the money men would sell him down the river again, nor did he have to listen to their carping. But it also limited him at times because he did not have big capital. His legendary stubbornness served him well and ill. It certainly helped him push on toward success when anyone else would have despaired and quit. But it also still prevented him from recognizing important new technologies that he did not invent.
LOCATION: 5992

his perfected remote-controlled robotic boat, what he called his “teleautomaton.” He used a handheld transmitter to direct his boat to sail forward, change directions, and turn its lights on and off. While cementing his reputation as a weird and wonderful wizard, this display thoroughly obscured the two major scientific advances—a multichannel broadcasting system and remote-control electronics—embodied in this seemingly oversize toy.
LOCATION: 6040
