Erikson endorsed Freud's observation that a healthy self was capable of work and love but he concentrated more on the former than the latter. Others claimed that adolescents were far too obsessed with the latter. Or at least sex, a result many claimed flowed from the now familiar charge that parental supervision was too lax. That was the position of Marynia Farnham, whose *Adolescent* (1951) iterated her complaints against American mothers that she staked out in *Modern Woman*. Although she acknowledged American teenagers were caught between physical maturity and social prohibition, Farnham's response was not to recommend the loosening of moral strictures (or, find avenues for sublimation) but to espouse stricter supervision. Not surprisingly, Farnham was convinced that the job of supervision was that of the American wife. She excoriated women who "deserted the home for the supposedly more rewarding and exiting life of rivalry with men" and criticized parents who failed to enforce guidelines in the mistaken belief that “youngsters can make all decisions for themselves and that uncurbed freedom is their right from birth on.”[@farnham1951, p. 211, 221]

Based on his observation of ten Chicago-area high schools, sociologist James Coleman worried if re-establishing control was even possible. In his 1961 view, American teenagers had created a counterculture. Walled off from the rest of society, teenagers so resembled one other that being a teenager outweighed differences in race, income, or geography. The culture that teenagers built was, Coleman insisted, revolved around trivial concerns and driven by peer pressure and minute attention to the judgment of others. These other-directed personalities in training were consumers par excellence, interested only in making the proper impression at sporting events and dances. Much to Coleman’s dismay, they cared little for academic success and relegated scholars to social marginality. Teen culture, Coleman concluded, even when not openly delinquent, was incompatible with preparation for adulthood or contribution to the community.[@coleman1961]

As sociologist Bennett Berger argued in an incisive 1963 review, much of the criticism of teenagers exaggerated their separate and "countercultural" way of life. Coleman, for instance, missed a number of similarities between the teenagers that he studied and their parents. A majority of parents probably did not look at high school as solely, or even primarily, an academic venture. Teenagers' interest in cars, clothes, the opposite sex, and sports followed adults’ interest in those very same things. Berger pointed out that football, which Coleman dismissed as anti-intellectual and retrograde, served as a catalyst for community building, something academic achievement were too individualized and specialized to accomplish. Tales of juvenile delinquency and rock 'n' roll fueled rebellion notwithstanding, American teenagers could imitate their parents' way of life. A majority of Coleman's respondents indicated that they preferred the parent-approved Pat Boone over Elvis Presley by a wide margin and claimed that they would rather risk breaking with a friend than earning their parents’ disapproval.[^55]

[^55]: Bennett M. Berger, “Adolescence and Beyond: An Essay Review of Three Books on the Problems of Growing Up: *The Adolescent Society* by James Coleman; *Growing Up Absurd* by Paul Goodman; *The Vanishing Adolescent* by Edgar Z. Friedenberg,” *Social Problems* 10, 4 (Spring): 394-408.

By the end of the period, Erikson’s work had become an inspiration for criticism not simply of the state of adolescence but also of the culture to which adolescences were expected to adapt. The critics whose indictments appeared in the last 1950s and early 1960s wrote with considerably more sympathy for the dilemmas of teenagers than Farnham or Coleman and were less committed to a version of the self anchored in prevailing values. Taken as a whole, the professor of education Edgar Z. Friedenberg, the anarchist-Gestalt therapist Paul Goodman, and the cultural anthropologist Jules Henry criticized American adolescence for its failure both to be a true moratorium and to provide viable pathways to meaningful love and work. What bedeviled American teenagers was not so much that they were turned loose on their own but that they made decisions in a social environment with an impoverished sense of the possibility of self.[@friedenberg1959 @goodman2012; @henry1963].

Of the three, Friendenberg drew most directly on Erikson. He deplored that American adolescence had ceased to be a period of experimentation and true counterculture and had instead been contaminated by adult insistence that activities have socially acceptable ends. Unlike simple societies and lower-class subcultures, Friendenberg argued, intricate social organizations require an extended testing process so people can develop a repertoire of responses to complex and changing expectations. Individuals developed stable ego identities by setting themselves against the social order and becoming aware of “the complex, subtle, and precious difference between himself and his environment.”[^47] The _sturm und drang_ of adolescence might last yet lead teenagers to achieve a profound sense of self, Friedenberg asserted in one of the book’s more controversial passages, if they were free to acted as if they were aristocrats. He had in mind not so much imperiousness as self-assuredness. Adults were unlikely to allow such behavior but there was a model for safe aristocratic demeanor in British boarding schools, which gave “adolescents something to be adolescent about” in a relatively protected environment. American children, on the other hand, were provided experiences with the appearance of adulthood but none of the difficulties or unpleasantness. Rather than allowing disagreements to unfold properly, adult anxieties actively suppressed clashes. By treating all disagreement as unproductive, American society insured that growing up would result in few authentic individuals capable of deeply felt relationships with others.

If Farnham and Coleman looked rather unsympathetically at teenagers’ efforts to find themselves, a trio of cultural critics did not. Best known to later generations was the anarchist critic and Gestalt therapist Paul Goodman. In _Growing Up Absurd_ (1960), Goodman argued, contra Coleman, that adults had too much control over adolescence. Rather than chaos, Goodman discerned conformity and training for regimented work, which he dismissed as “the organized system.” Schools, he charged, were factories of impulse suppression and sexual prudery. Given his Gestalt commitments, Goodman was especially opposed to selves divided from society. Youth institutions enforced boundaries, denying the young the chance to mold the world to their liking. Under such circumstances, Goodman argued, adulthood was mere adjustment and perpetual living with a perpetually constrained ego. Simply rejecting the American way of growing up was insufficient, Goodman maintained. The Beats earned his disapproval for their resignation and, while understanding of delinquents’ response, he nonetheless found them too fatalistic for his liking. Growing up with meaning, Goodman concluded, required reworking the world of love and work to encourage honesty, independence, and caring.

Edgar Z. Friedenberg, on the other hand, worried that American adolescence was not the moratorium that it was intended to be. His _Vanishing Adolescent_ (1959) lamented that rather than an Eriksonian time of experimentation and counterculture, the teenage years were contaminated by adult insistence that activities have socially acceptable ends. Unlike simple societies and lower-class subcultures, Friendenberg argued, intricate social organizations require an extended testing process so people can master roles. Individuals developed stable ego identities by setting themselves against the social order and becoming aware of “the complex, subtle, and precious difference between himself and his environment.”[^47] The _sturm und drang_ of adolescence might last yet lead teenagers to achieve a profound sense of self, Friedenberg asserted in one of the book’s more controversial passages, if they were free to acted as if they were aristocrats. He had in mind not so much imperiousness as self-assuredness. Adults were unlikely to allow such behavior but there was a model for safe aristocratic demeanor in British boarding schools, which gave “adolescents something to be adolescent about” in a relatively protected environment. American children, on the other hand, were provided experiences with the appearance of adulthood but none of the difficulties or unpleasantness. Rather than allowing disagreements to unfold properly, adult anxieties actively suppressed clashes. By treating all disagreement as unproductive, American society insured that growing up would result in few authentic individuals capable of deeply felt relationships with others.

Goodman and Friedenberg shared a dislike of other-directedness and consumerism for preventing independence and authenticity. Although praised for their emphasis on teenage initiative, both attracted criticism their partial portraits of the teenage condition. Critics charged they did far too little empirical observation, dwelt far too much on the pathologies of adolescence and all too often attributed them solely to adult actions. Then, as now, they were also criticized for making the male teenager the norm, a choice possibly a consequence of their own homosexuality. Women, Goodman insisted in the introduction, did not grow up absurd since they “will have children which is absolutely self-justifying, like any other natural or creative act.” Further, he went on in the introduction, the problems of teenage boys were “intensely interesting to women, for if the boys do not grow up to be men, where shall the women find men?”[^48]

Anthropologist Jules Henry, on the other hand, took girls’ problems seriously and provided a more detailed description of the problems of finding one’s self. The adolescence sections of his _Culture Against Man_ (1963), based on observations of St. Louis-area high schools, revealed how the essence of the teen years was insecurity. More than any other analyst, Henry captured the silent terror and constant confusion of adolescence. Writing with a socially aware Freudianism, Henry was sympathetic to the costs of the demands of the id, which were exaggerated by the constant mobility of American life. Because families moved so frequently, friendships, which would have enabled sublimation, were often unstable. Such instability resulted in an inadequacy felt on the prom dance floor and automobile backseats. Parental shortcomings lay less in the absence of discipline than in failure to establish and live out meaningful lives. This inability of adults to provide ego ideals, Henry argued, created a void that peers filled. Girls were especially affected in adolescence. The difficulty lay not so much in limited goals, since beauty, fashion and popularity struck him as legitimate and meaningful pursuits, as parental goading of girls into sexual competition to snare the right husband and condemnation of those who refused to compete.[^49]

Henry located another consequence of the lack of ego ideals in the aversion of teenagers to work. The example of “hard-working daddies” who are “little at home and burdened with the irritations, coronaries, and ulcers of their work” only underwrote pleasure-seeking behavior. Schools, too, were inadequate in setting meaningful ideals. In contrast to Coleman, Henry regarded school work as unchallenging and meaningless. Studying, especially when nagged to do so by parents, made Henry’s informants feel at the will of others. Promise of vague future benefits from school work only compounded the feeling. Yet because adolescents neither developed their own standards of success nor were involved in institutions in which the standards were meaningful to their talents or aspirations, grades loomed large in their education and work life. Grading met no needs, Henry claimed, but it did accustom students to accept impersonal, standardized norms as the best metric of self-worth. For the majority, this too was a recipe for feelings of inadequacy. Turning to pleasure seeking in response yielded little long-term gain and augured poorly for leaving adolescence with an Eriksonian “reward.”

His uneasiness with adult maturity is further evident in his dismissal of his former teacher's advice that an immature man wishes to die of a noble cause while a mature one hopes to live humbly for one. In light of his fear of change as the destruction childish innocence (the obscenities on thee merry-go-round), it makes sense that Holden envies the stasis of the Eskimos in the diorama at the Natural History museum. 

Alienation, normally an obstacle to coming to terms with oneself and one’s feelings, is here the guarantor of authenticity and the protector of identity against change and social expectations. The enduring popularity of the novel among adults suggests, perhaps, a desire to jettison adulthood from the liminal state of adolescence. The depth of the identification with the novel had led some to talk of adolescence as a kind of ethnicity.


